# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Explain different data types in Python

# Python data types


Python may not use data types in front of the variable name, but each variable still has a data type. The type of data put into a variable dictates the **data type** of the variable. Below is a table that details a few of the different data types you may come across in Python.
>
Type name | What type of data it holds
--- | ---
Boolean | Either *true* or *false*
Numbers | Can be whole numbers, fractions, decimal, or complex numbers
Strings | Any sequence of characters (letters)
Bytes & byte arrays | This could be the binary representation of a file
Lists | Are ordered sequences of other data types
Tuples | Sequence of immutable Python objects
Dictionary | Collection of key-value pairs 
>
## Boolean
>
```python
yes = True
```
>
Boolean variables can contain either a value of **True** or a value of **False**. Useful for controlling the flow of code depending on outcomes of comparisons.
## Number
>
```python
x = 26
y = 3.14
z = -138.31
```
>
Numbers can contain any numeric value such as integers or decimal values.
## String
>
```python
university = "Texas A&M University"
```
>
String is the data type given to a variable which holds a series of alphanumeric (known as characters). Strings are one of the most commonly used data types in most programming languages and Python is no exception.
## Byte array
>
```python
ba = bytearray(fh.read())
```
>
Byte arrays are long lists of binary which represent an item, usually a file input.
## Lists
>
```python
winter = ["December", "January", "February", "March"]
```
>
Lists are a data type that holds a series of data types. You can have a list of numbers, a list of booleans, a list of strings. You can even have lists of lists. It is important to note that the list items **do not** need to agree in data type. You can mix and match data types. When describing the position (or index as it's sometimes referred to) items in a list, we start with the index 0 as the first position, 1 as the second position, and so on. In the example above December is in index 0, January in index 1, February in 2, and March in 3. Lists can add or remove values.
## Tuples
>
```python
itemList = (1, 2, 3)
```
>
Much like lists, tuples are data types that hold a series of data. One difference between the two is that tuples use parentheses while lists use square brackets. Items within a tuple also start at an index 0 for the first item. Unlike lists, you cannot remove values from a tuple.
## Dictionary
>
```python
cities = {'Houston': 1, 'San Antonio': 2, 'Dallas': 3, 'Austin': 4}
```
>
Dictionaries hold a series of data in a different way than tuples and lists. Dictionaries do not care about order, but store things in a key-value pair. If you wish to get value from a dictionary, you would use it's corresponding named key to get said value.


