# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Detail basic software engineering principals

# Software engineering
Before we delve into the interesting world of Python data types, we should first touch on some development basics. It is important to know some basic software engineering before hitting the ground running. We use the term software engineering loosely here as no one can seem to agree on a single definition, but we'll use the term to define a series of questions one should ask themselves before they set forth on their work. Having a solid plan as to how your script / workflow / app / program will work and how components will interact will go a long way in helping you lay a solid foundation as well as help you steer away from superfluous features. 
>
- Will the program be used to fix a specific problem or will it address many?
- How will all the components interact?
- Who is the targeted demographic?
- Is your program strictly for yourself or is it something you plan to market towards others?
- Will you be able to accommodate many different users simultaneously?
- How will the data be used? What interfaces are needed?
- What is the minimum viable product?
>
The minimum steps in developing anything follows these simple steps. You start first with a wireframe. This wireframe shows what the program / app / project will look like. Use the wireframe to design your project in a way that feels simple and natural. You then use the wireframe as a basis for the rest of the project. After you have established a wireframe, you then move on to creating a rough draft of said wireframe in code be it a dumb user interface or a simple user input prompt. Now that you have an idea of what pieces will be in the project, you start to work on individual parts of the project. Once you have confirmed that each part works independently, you can move into merging each piece into the project as a whole. It is important here to make sure nothing has broken in the process. With the project complete, you then can move on to writing documentation on how to use the project and even add in documentation for the code itself for anyone else to utilize in the future. Testing can be complete at this point: it is important to try and catch as many bugs as possible before releasing a project. Then you can launch! After launch you're now also responsible for supporting the user further on by updating your code if any bugs manage to manifest themselves.
>




