# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Detail Python conditionals
# Conditionals
While programming, you will come across an instance in which you would like to compare two or more variables in order to change the execution route of the code. For instance, what if you wish to compare two numbers; one provided by the user and one hard coded into the program. 
>
```python
i = 5
k = input("Please provide a number: ")
```
>
How could we print out a message if and only if we provide a number that is less than our hard coded value of 5? Due to Python's simple syntax getting this in code is surprisingly easy. We'll be using a conditional statement known as an **if** statement. Below we introduce our if statement to control the flow of the code. 
>
```python
i = 5
k = input("Please provide a number: ")

if int(k) < i:
    print("The number you have provided is less than our value.")
```
>
The **if** statement follows a rather simple syntax of a value, a comparison operator, and a secondary value you wish to compare the first to. In the code block above we have our if statement comparing the value of **k** and seeing if it is less than the value of **i**. If the value of **k** is less than **i**, we then execute the line(s) of code below the if statement. When we provide a value of 1 for our **k** variable, we will trigger the print statement below the if. You may be wondering what the **int(k)** portion of the if statement does: it is called a **cast**. It is a shorthand way of trying to convert a data type returned by the **input** method and turning it into another data type, in this case we are taking in a string value from **input** and turning it into an integer data type (numeric).
>
What if you wish to have another print statement that informs the user that their provided input value is *greater* than the hard coded value of **i**? We can add an additional portion to our **if** statement called an **else** statement. It is quite common to have both **if**s and **else**s together, much like you would find peanut butter with jelly. Well how do we go about using an **else** statement?
>
```python
i = 5
k = input("Please provide a number: ")

if int(k) < i:
    print("The number you have provided is less than our value.")
else:
    print("The number you have provided is greater than our value.")
```
>
We will now receive a message saying our provided input is greater than the hard coded value. Pretty neat right? Since if statements work off comparison operators, we can even nest our if statements if we wish. To accomplish this all we have to do is replace our print statement found inside our else with yet another if statement! An example of a nested if statement is found below.
>
```python
i = 5
k = input("Please provide a number: ")

if int(k) < i:
    print("The number you have provided is less than our value.")
else:
    if int(k) < 10:
        print("The number you have provided is greater than our value BUT less than 10.")
    else:
        print("The number you have provided is greater than our value AND greater than or equal to 10.")
```
>
The last conditional we'll go over is known as a **chained conditional**. Instead of writing several if / else / if / else resulting a very far right indented code block, we can use **chained conditional**s to keep things more concise. We'll be using a new Python keyword here **elif** to chain our conditionals together. All it means is else if. If the first statement in our code block resolves to false, it will then try and evaluate the first **elif**'s conditional statement. If that resolves to false, it will go to the next **elif** and so on. If no if or elif resolves to true, it would then look for an else statement.
>
```python
i = 5
k = input("Please provide a number: ")

if int(k) < i:
    print("The number you have provided is less than our value.")
elif int(k) == i:
    print("The number you have provided is equal to our value.")
else:
    print("The number you have provided is greater than our value.")
```
>
Below is a really long winded way of converting a input (1 - 12) and printing the corresponding month name to the Python terminal using conditionals.
>
```python
month = int(input("Please input a numeric month (1 - 12): ")) # We take care to cast our input into a numeric so we can compare it

if month == 1:
    print("January")
elif month == 2:
    print("February")
elif month == 3:
    print("March")
elif month == 4:
    print("April")
elif month == 5:
    print("May")
elif month == 6:
    print("June")
elif month == 7:
    print("July")
elif month == 8:
    print("August")
elif month == 9:
    print("September")
elif month == 10:
    print("October")
elif month == 11:
    print("November")
elif month == 12:
    print("December")
else:
    print("You didn't enter a valid number")
```
>

## Videos
[Module2-Topic1-Part3](https://youtu.be/dTGnHZz6Kd0)
