# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Detail Python loops
# Loops
Sometimes we want to execute a set of code several times without writing the same code again and again. The process of executing a set of code repeatedly is known as **looping**. Each time a **loop** loops, it is known as an **iteration**. In Python, we have two basic loop statements. We have the **for** loop and the **while** loop, each have their own specific use cases. 
## for loop
After if statements, **for** loops are going to be one of your most widely utilized functions of Python. We can use **for** loops to iterate (move through) a list of values without us having to do so manually. All **for** loops have a structure like so:
>
```python
for loopVariable in sequence:
    # Do something with loopVariable
```
>
Just like an if statement, we have our statement line then an indented code line just below. Unlike an if statement though, a **for** loop will execute without checking a boolean expression. It instead will move through a sequence of data such as a list once for each element of said sequence. If you have a sequence with 5 values, the **for** loop will iterate through 5 times. It may not seem to useful now, but when you have hundreds of values in a sequence or more you will see the true power of **for** loops. 
>
```python
languages = ["C", "C++", "Python", "Delphi"]
```
>
If you take the **languages** variable shown above and wanted to print each value to the Python terminal, how would you do so currently? With **print** statements. Remember that when dealing with a **list** like the variable **languages** we start counting each item at position 0. Looking at the code below you can see how tedious it would be to print out anything more than 4 or 5 values would be.
>
```python
languages = ["C", "C++", "Python", "Delphi"]
print(languages[0])
print(languages[1])
print(languages[2])
print(languages[3])
```
>
Let us use a **for** loop now to quickly print out the different values present in a larger list.
>
```python
languages = ["C", "C++", "Python", "Delphi", "Perl", "Erlang", "Javascript", "Java", "Pascal", "BASIC", "Assembly", "F#", "C#", "Swift", "Objective-C", "Kotlin", "R", "Scala", "Ruby", "PHP"]
for language in languages:
    print(language)
```
In the **for** loop we have created a new variable called **language** (note language is singular). The loop will execute and grab the first value present in the variable **languages** (note languages is plural). We now have variable called **language** that has a value of **C** since it is the first value in **languages**. We then print that value to the Python terminal. The loop knows there are more values present in **languages** so it will move on to the next position. This makes the value of **language** equal to the second position in the **languages** sequence. The loop now print out **C++** to the screen. This loop will continuously print each and every value present in **languages** until it runs out of values. Then the loop will finish execution. Much easier and cleaner code using the **for** loop to do our work for us rather than having many print statements. This is the beauty of coding: let the code do the work for you!
>
## while loop
What if you wish to run a loop for as long as a condition is true? This would prove problematic in a **for** loop. Instead we use what is called a **while** loop. This type of loop will run continuously until a certain condition is met.
>
```python
while booleanExpression:
    # Do something
```
>
We can use **while** loops continuously prompt a user for input until they provide a value which we are looking for. Below is an example of such a use case:
>
```python
magicNumber = "16"
userInput = input("Guess the magic number: ")

while userInput != magicNumber:
    userInput = input("Guess the magic number: ")
```
>
When using **while** loops, you should be careful to make sure that in the body of the loop you are modifying a variable or the condition in such a way for the **while** loop to eventually stop executing. Not creating a condition in which the **while** loop can finish is called an **infinite** loop. These are very bad as your **while** loop will never stop. Code further on in the program will never execute and you'll probably be forced to kill the Python process on your computer if this happens. An example of an **infinite** loop can be found below (run this at your own risk):
>
```python
while 2 > 1:
    print("True")
```
>
At the very minimum, you should define a variable that can act as a counter and use that as the boolean statement inside your while loop. This way, every time the while loop finishes one loop, counter will increase by one so that by the fifth loop, the while loop will terminate.
>
```python
counter = 0
while counter < 5:
    counter += 1
    # do something
```
>
If you want to see what happens when you create an infinite loop, look [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LFOoeaQHans).


## Videos
[Module2-Topic1-Part4](https://youtu.be/9S1TXt7XJUE)
