# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Detail Python comparisons
# Operators
In Python, we have expressions known as **boolean expressions** which are statements that compare two values and resolve to either a value of **True** or **False**. We compare the two values with what's known as a **comparison operator**. Below is a table describing the different comparison operators found in Python.
>
Operator | What it means
--- | ---
== | Are the two values equal?
!= | Are the two values *NOT* equal?
\> | Is the first value greater than the second?
< | Is the first value less than the second?
\>= | Is the first value greater than or equal to the second?
<= | Is the first value less than or equal to the second?
>
Note that when assigning a value to a variable we use a single equal sign whereas when we are comparing if two values are equal we use two equal signs. Below we have a few example variables with their resulting value given a comparison operator. 
>
```python
x = 1
y = 2

# The following print statements will print a value to the Python terminal
# The value printed is shown next to the print statement in the comments

print(x == y)   # False
print(x != y)   # True
print(x > y)    # False
print(x < y)    # True
print(x >= y)   # False
print(x <= y)   # True
```
>
Please note that in Python we reserve the use of the pound / hash sign for code comments. These comments usually contain messages about code or anything you want to say. Whatever follows a pound sign on a line is ignored by Python.
>
# Logical operators
In addition to comparison operators, we also have **logical operators**. The three logical operators are **and**, **or**, and **not**. We can use these to expand upon our previous example to include many different boolean expressions.
>
Operator | What it means
--- | ---
and | Returns True if and only if both expressions are true
or | Returns True if either or both expressions are true.
not | Returns the opposite of a resolved expression. 

>
```python
x = 1
y = 2

print(x > y and x == y) # False, since both expressions are false
print(x < y and x == y) # False, since only one expression is true
print(x < y and x != y) # True, since both expressions are true

print(x > y or x == y)  # False, since both expressions are false
print(x > y or x != y)  # True, since one expression is true
print(x < y or x == y)  # True, since one expression is true
print(x < y and x != y) # True, since both expressions are true

print(not(x != y))      # False, (x != y) resolves to true, then we flip it to false
print(not(x > y))       # True, (x > y) resolves to false, then we flip it to true

```
>


## Lecture video - Python comparisons
[Module2-Topic1-Part2](https://youtu.be/ZEGOmyLZw0Q)
