# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Detail Python functions
- Learn about scope and Python spacing
# Functions
Usually when we write programs and scripts they can become quite unwieldy if we do no incorporate a certain structure to keep things organized. The best way to maintain a tidy code base is through the use of code blocks known as **functions**. **Functions** are snippets of code we write to perform a specific task and act best when you keep them sort and simple with a name that accurately explains what the **function** does. What does a **function** look like?
>
```python
def say_hello():
    print("Hello there")
```
>
That's it! They can be as short or as long as you want. It is good programming practice to try and keep a **function**'s function limited to a single task. You do not want to do too much in a single **function**. Having large **function**s makes reading code more difficult than if it were distributed amongst several **functions**. 
>
At this point you may be wondering how one goes about using a function? It is quite simple really, we merely write the following to call a function. 
>
```python
def say_hello():
    print("Hello there")

say_hello() # Calls a function
```
So far we've created functions that do basic printing to the Python terminal. But what if we want to return a value from the function to use elsewhere? How would we get a result from a function to use elsewhere? We use what's called a **return** value. All we need to do is put **return** followed by the value we wish to return. We can even use a variable name if we wish.
>
```python
def basic_addition():
    return 1 + 2

result = basic_addition()

print(result)
print(basic_addition())
```
>
In the code above we've created a function called **basic_addition()**. Inside you can see that we add two numbers together and return the result with the **return**. Now whenever we call the function with **basic_addition()** we can get the returned value; in this case our function returns a value of 3. Calling this function on its own does nothing that we can see. It does not print anything to the Python terminal. We can instead use the returned value and assign it to a variable *or* we could even use the function call as an anonymous variable (a variable without a name). The first print statement uses the result of **basic_addition()** and assigns that to the variable **result**. We then print the **result** variable. In addition to this, we can also use just put **basic_addition()** as the "variable" we wish to print. This will call the function and print whatever is returned as a result.
>
Now that we have gone over creating functions and returning results from functions, we'll now dive into how to pass different values into a function. At the moment our functions only use the parameters that we've defined in them. We must first define our function so that it accepts some variables. These variables that are passed into a function are known as **parameters**. We can put any values or variables here as a parameter. Then when the function is called we call the values we passed in **arguments**. It is the arguments that we then use to do whatever is inside the function.

First we must clarify the difference between **parameter**s and **argument**s. These are often used interchangeably but are actually two different things. **Parameter**s are the variables we see inside a function signature. **Argument**s are the variables you provide that go *INSIDE* the function itself for further usage.
>
```python
num1 = int(input("What is the first number? "))
num2 = int(input("What is the second number? "))

def basic_addition(firstNum, secondNum): #Parameters
    return firstNum + secondNum

result = basic_addition(num1, num2) #Arguments

print(result)
```
>
Notice in the example above that we pass in variables **num1** and **num2** parameters yet inside our function these are named **firstNum** and **secondNum**. Inside the function **basic_addition()** we've renamed our variables within the function. Outside of the function these variables are still **num1** and **num2**; if you use **firstNum** outside of the function you will end up with an error. The function takes in the parameters then adds them together. Once it has done that, Python returns the result and stores that value inside the variable **result** for usage later on.
>
We can even create default parameters for our function if we wish. In the function below we will be declaring a function with a default value. This default value is used whenever we call the function without providing parameters. If parameters are used, then the default value is ignored and the parameter value is used instead.
>
```python
def portuguese_speaking_countries(country = "Brazil"):
    print(country + " is a portuguese speaking country")

print(portuguese_speaking_countries())  # prints "Brazil"
print(portuguese_speaking_countries("Angola"))  # prints "Angola"

```

>
One of the more important aspects of functions one needs to be aware of when creating and using functions with Python is the order in which you do everything. Imagine you have a script setup like this:
>
```python
x = 1
y = 2
add(x, y)
def add(x, y):
    return x + y

```
>
Notice how the function call is *above* the actual function definition? When we run this snippet we actually get an error `NameError: name 'add' is not defined`. Python tried to call the function **add()** but couldn't find it. To fix this, just move your function *above* the function call. Shown below is how you would properly order things.
>
```python
def add(x, y):
    return x + y
x = 1
y = 2
add(x, y)
```
>

>
## Function vs Method
Much like how sometimes programmers interchangeably use parameters and arguments, they also interchangeably use **method** for function. A function is what we've been using above, they float freely around inside our Python script page. **Methods** is a term used in object oriented languages for functions that belong to a specific class. We'll be diving further into this at a later time but just know that the two words are often used for the same thing. If you incorrectly use one one for the other, don't worry as most developers will know exactly what you mean.
>
# Scope
**Scope** is an important concept to learn about in any programming language. What is **scope**? Did you ask yourself earlier why we can have variables inside our function **basic_addition** that do not exist outside of the function? That is due to scope. The variables only exist inside the function they were declared in. The rest of the program has no idea about **firstNum** or **secondNum**.
>
Let's look at an example. 
>
```python
def add(a, b):
    print("x: ", x)
    print("y: ", y)
    return a + b
def subtract(i, k):
    print("x: ", x)
    print("y: ", y)
    return i - k
x = 6
y = 4
add(x, y)
subtract(x, y)
print(a)
print(b)
print(i)
print(k)
```
>
When we run this code, we will get four print statements to the console before we get an error. We can see that inside our functions, we can use and print the values of variables **x** and **y**. Inside each variable we can use their respective arguments without issue. It is only when we try and use the argument variables *OUTSIDE* of their functions that we get an error. When we try to print the value of variable **a**, we get the following error `NameError: name 'a' is not defined`. This is because variables **a** and **b** are local to the function **add()** only. We cannot use **a** or **b** inside of function **subtract()** either. The variables **x** and **y** are global in scope, meaning we can use them inside any function.





## Lecture video - Functions and Scopes
[Module2-Topic2](https://youtu.be/e6AaKwtUnLc)
