# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Learn about regular expressions and why they are great
- Detail use cases where regular expressions would be useful
# Regular Expressions
There will come a point in time in your programming career in which you will want to search a string for a certain pattern of characters. Maybe you want to find the number of occurrences of "Road" in an address book or maybe you want to look for an email address inside an extremely large block of text programmatically. You can come up with a solution using things such as **find()** or **replace()**, but will quickly realize the shortcomings of such methods.
>
We can use a type of language called **Regular Expressions**, sometimes written **re** or **regex**. Regular expressions allow you to create text patterns that can be used for searching strings, files, or anything really. Most programming languages have support for regular expressions which make learning how to properly create search patterns with regular expressions a valuable skill. 

# Basic patterns
Below you will find a basic list of useful regular expressions and what they do. When using these in Python, you will probably want to use a raw string in the search string as to prevent backslash plague. Remember to use a raw string, just affix a 'r' to the start of any string literal.
>
```python
rawString = r"This\nwill\nnot\nbe\non\nmultiple\nlines"
```
>
>
RegEx expression | Matches
--- | ---
[aeiou] | Any case of a, e, i, o, u
junk | The string "junk"
. | A single character
\w | A single alphanumeric character
\W | A single non-alphanumeric character
\b | A boundary between words
\s | A single whitespace character
\t | A tab
\n | A new line
\r | A return
\d | A digit
\D | A single non-digit character
\* | Any number of what comes before *
\+ | One or more of what comes before +
^ | The start of a string
$ | The end of a string
x{n,m} | character x at least *n* times, but less than *m* times
>
# RegEx methods
## match()
We can use this method to look for a match at the beginning of a line; it does not need to match the whole string, only the beginning. Will return a **MatchObject**.
>
```python
import re
result = re.match("c", "cat")
print(result) # Prints <_sre.SRE_Match object; span=(0, 1), match='c'>
result = re.match("a", "cat") # Prints None since "a" is not at the beginning of our string
print(result)
```
>
## search()
This method attempts to match throughout the string until it finds a match. Will return a **MatchObject**.
>
```python
import re
result = re.search("i", "abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz")
print(result) # Prints <_sre.SRE_Match object; span=(8, 9), match='i'>
```
>
## sub()
This method will search the entire input for the specified pattern and replace with a given value.
>
```python
import re
s = '100 NORTH BROAD ROAD'
result = re.sub('ROAD$', 'RD.', s)
print(result) # Prints 100 NORTH BROAD RD.
```
>
## findall()
This method will return an array of all non-overlapping matches.
>
```python
x = "6 geese a-layin' 51 golden rings 4 calling birds 33 French hens 2 turtle doves 91 partridge in a pear tree"
result = re.findall(r"\d+", x)
print(result) # Prints ['6', '51', '4', '33', '2', '91']
```
>
<!-- # Match objects
The methods **match()** and **search()** methods return objects called **Match** objects. These objects contain some  -->
>
# Practicing RegEx
The following examples are from Mark Pilgrim's **Dive into Python 3**. 
## Example #1
> [Street addresses case study](http://www.diveintopython3.net/regular-expressions.html#streetaddresses) by Mark Pilgrim / [CC BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/); contains slight changes
>
In this example, our goal is to replace occurrences of "ROAD" in a typical street address with the abbreviation "RD.". In the Python snippet labeled "Part 1", you can see our address inside the variable **s**. We can simply use the built in Python function **replace()** for strings that will take in an input string and a plain pattern string as parameters. You can see that this will replace the "ROAD" portion with our "RD." abbreviation.
>
```python
# Part 1
s = '100 NORTH MAIN ROAD'
s.replace('ROAD', 'RD.')
# Prints '100 NORTH MAIN RD.'
```
>
But if we apply the same logic to the snippet labeled "Part 2", we'll quickly find that this code will fall apart quickly. Look at what happens when we apply the same **replace()** function to an address that contains "ROAD" inside the street name such as "BROAD". 

>
```python
# Part 2
s = '100 NORTH BROAD ROAD'
s.replace('ROAD', 'RD.')
# Prints '100 NORTH BRD. RD.'
```
>
We've turned "BROAD ROAD" into "BRD. RD.". That doesn't seem right. Maybe if we try and limit the **replace()** function to only look at the first few characters in a string, hopefully it will prevent words containing our search pattern from changing. "Part 3" contains the code necessary to limit our **replace()** to just the last four positions of our input string; we limit it to the last four since "ROAD" contains four characters. The part **s[:-4]** is saying "Get the substring of **s** from the beginning up to the last four characters" while **s[-4:]** is equal to "Get the substring from the last four characters to the end of the input string".
>
```python
# Part 3
s = '100 NORTH BROAD ROAD'
s = s[:-4] + s[-4:].replace('ROAD', 'RD.')
# Prints '100 NORTH BROAD RD.'
```
>
This appears to have fixed our issue where **replace()** would change words containing our pattern. But what if we have a word that contains more than four characters such as street? This code will become more and more unwieldy to manage. In "Part 4" we use a regular expression to easily and more reliably change the "ROAD" part of an address to "RD.".
>
```python
# Part 4
import re
s = '100 NORTH BROAD ROAD'
re.sub('ROAD$', 'RD.', s)
# Prints '100 NORTH BROAD RD.'
```
>
We must remember to import the Python regular expressions module with the **import re** line. This *imports* additional functionality into our Python script allowing us to use regular expressions; without it we would get an error whenever trying to run **re.sub()**. We use the **sub()** method of **replace()** to search our source string **s** for the pattern "ROAD$" and replace it with "RD.". Remember that "$" in regular expression means the end of the string, so it will look for and replace "ROAD" only if it appears at the end.
>
## Example #2
<!-- > [Phone numbers case study](http://www.diveintopython3.net/regular-expressions.html#phonenumbers) by Mark Pilgrim / [CC BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/) -->
> [Street addresses case study](http://www.diveintopython3.net/regular-expressions.html#streetaddresses) by Mark Pilgrim / [CC BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/); contains slight changes
>
So previously we figured out how to use regular expressions to replace "ROAD" with "RD." in an input string. How can we apply regular expressions to replace stuff that isn't at the end of a string? What if we need to replace multiple things? Below we'll dive into these cases.
>
```python
# Part 1
import re
s = '100 BROAD'
re.sub('ROAD$', 'RD.', s)
# Prints '100 BRD.'
```
>
Here we use a simple "ROAD$" pattern to replace "ROAD" if it is found at the end of an input string with "RD.". Same as we did in the first example. But since "ROAD" is not its own word at the end, we end up replacing the "ROAD" in "BROAD" since it is the last word in the input string.
>
```python
# Part 2
import re
s = '100 BROAD'
re.sub('\\bROAD$', 'RD.', s)
# Prints '100 BROAD'
```
>
In "Part 2" we add "\b" to our search pattern which will tell RegEx to only match those "ROAD"s that are their own words (it has a word boundary before the "ROAD" part). This prevents "BROAD" from changing. We normally use the backslash in conjunction with characters such as **\n** for a new line or **\t** for a tab. Since we're using a normal string, Python will interpret **\b** as a backspace. So we must escape the backslash with another backslash, hence the double backslash. If you have to do this several times with regular expressions, you will end up with backslash plague. 
>
```python
# Part 3
import re
s = '100 BROAD'
re.sub(r'\bROAD$', 'RD.', s)
# Prints '100 BROAD'
```
>
"Part 3" fixes backslash plague with a raw string, which ignores all the special characters such as **\n** or **\t**. We can then just use a plain "\b" inside our pattern without worrying about special characters.

>
```python
# Part 4
import re
s = '100 BROAD ROAD APT. 3'
re.sub(r'\bROAD$', 'RD.', s)
# Prints '100 BROAD ROAD APT. 3'
```
>
In "Part 4", our "ROAD" is not at the end of the input string anymore. This causes our search pattern to fail as it is still only looking for "ROAD" at the end of the input string.

>
```python
# Part 5
import re
s = '100 BROAD ROAD APT. 3'
re.sub(r'\bROAD\b', 'RD.', s)
# Prints '100 BROAD RD. APT 3'
```
>
We get the desired results in "Part 5" because we search for "ROAD" anywhere in our input where it is its own word; this will keep words like "BROAD" from being affected.

# Additional resources
- http://www.diveintopython3.net/regular-expressions.html
- https://developers.google.com/edu/python/regular-expressions

## Videos - Regular Expressions
[Module3-Topic2-Part1](https://youtu.be/srnr3p1M0EY)

[Module3-Topic2-Part2](https://youtu.be/-IvB2gwQ3OI)
