# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Go over the basics of Object Oriented Programming (OOP)
- Learn how to create a class and objects
# What is Object Oriented Programming?
Object oriented programming breaks your program into different types of objects. These objects are individual components of a program that work together to complete the whole.
In Python, everything is an object -- integers, strings, lists... These objects are from language defined types; meaning we did not have to create these classes.
>

# Object Oriented programming in a nutshell
Below you will find the basics of working with classes and objects. Hopefully this will familiarize you with the basics of OO programming in such as way as to not scare you from utilizing objects and classes in the future.
## Classes
Classes are at the heart of Object Oriented programming, in fact, most modern software engineers use this approach to programming. Think of a class as the blueprint that lays out all the parts and features of a brand new data type; a data type we can create with all the bells and whistles we want. It's important when creating classes to collect all data and functions for that type into the same class (aka encpsulation). If we had a class **Road** some of the attributes needed for each **Road** object could be **age**, **composition**, **trafficLoad**, **isOpen**, or **environmentalClimate**; all of which would be important to know about a particular instance of a road. We also will want to group all **Road** functions into our class; it would not make sense to have functions pertaining to **Road**s inside a **Pipeline** class.
>
This may all sound complicated, but is rather simple when you get the hang of it. Enough talk then, let's create a new Python class! Keep in mind that in Python you can define a new class anywhere in your code as long as your spacing and indention is correct. 
>
```python
class Car:
    def __init__():
        pass
    def setColor(self, newColor):
        self.color = newColor
    def honkHorn(self):
        print("Beep beep")
```
>
Thanks to Python's emphasis on easy readability, we can quickly tell what this class is trying to do. We have our class **Car** that contains two functions specific to our new **Car** data type: **setColor()** and **honkHorn()**. These are known as **methods** when they're limited to a specific class such as these. Each method within our class must take at least one argument, a reference to the instance of the class known as **self**. We can have more than just **self** or no others; the important bit is that we MUST include **self**. When we call a method outside of our class declaration, we do not need to supply the **self** parameter as it is included for us automatically.
>
The method **\_\_init__()** is always going to be called first whenever you create a new object. Within our **\_\_init__()** we are free to do a lot of setup stuff if we need to. If you're familiar with languages such as C# or Java, you've probably used a constructor inside your classes. Python does not allow for constructors, but it does allow for something quite similar: an initializer that is called once our object is created. That is what **\_\_init__()** does for us; it acts in the same way a constructor does. In the example below, we are creating a new class **Truck** with an **\_\_init__()** that takes in one parameter (remember we never pass in **self**) **value**. Inside the method, we are setting the value our instance attribute **mpg** equal to the passed in argument **value**. When we initialize a new object **\_\_init__()** is called automatically and provided with the value inside the parenthesis. 
>
```python
class Truck:
    def __init__(self, value):
        self.mpg = value

x = Truck(17) ## We are setting the MPG of x equal to 17
```
>
## Objects
Objects are individual instances of a class created using the class as a blueprint. When we create a new variable of type **Car** (like in the example above) we've created a new instance of **Car**. To create an instance, we simply call the name of the class we want the object to be a type of. When we call the name of the class, we are in reality calling the **\_\_init__()** method inside a class. This method returns to us an instance of **Car**. Once we have a variable with an object as its value, we are free to call class methods on our object. Consider the following example.
>
```python
class Car:
    def setColor(self, newColor):
        self.color = newColor
    def honkHorn(self):
        print("Beep beep")

chevy = Car()
chevy.setColor('red') # Method that sets a new color for the chevy instance
chevy.honkHorn() # Method that prints 'Beep beep'
```
>
Each instance of a class (i.e. each object) is unique. If you try and compare two instances of the same class with the "==" operator, you'll find that it will return False. These objects may be of the same type, but they occupy separate spaces in RAM. As such, when we compare the two like that, we will get a False since they are not the same instance, but instead are two different instances of the same class. 
>
```python
class Car:
    def setColor(self, newColor):
        self.color = newColor
    def honkHorn(self):
        print("Beep beep")

chevy = Car()
ford = Car()
if chevy == ford:
    print("TRUE")
else:
    print("FALSE")

chevy.setColor('Red')
ford.setColor('Blue')
print(chevy.color)
print(ford.color)
```
>
When we want to call a function specific to a method we simply use the object name, a period, and the name of the method we want to call. In the example above we are calling the method **setColor()** which is specific to the class **Car** on each of our **Car** instances.
>
## Attributes
Remember how classes are data types that group together different data into a single package? These data are known as **attributes** and can be accessed with a period (.) after the name of an object just like a method. Attributes are defined by an assignment statement, just as variables are defined. Unlike some other programming languages, we do not need to declare our attributes ahead of time; we are free to add new instance attributes as we see fit. In Python we have two types of attributes: class and instance. Class attributes are defined like a normal variable, but are at the same indentation level as class methods. These class attributes exist for each and every instance of an object. Instance methods are defined either inside of a method and are assigned using **self** or they're defined outside of a class using a normal assignment statement.
>
```python
class Truck:
    numOfWheels = 4 # This is an example of a class attribute; all instances of Truck have 4 wheels
    def __init__(self, color):
        self.color = color # This is an example of an instance attribute; only some instances will have a color attribute (that is, if it was created like so `chevy = Truck('green')`

chevy = Truck()
chevy.color = 'Green' # This is another example of an instance attribute
chevy.tinted = True # This is an example of an instance variable defined outside the class
print(chevy.numOfWheels) # This prints our class attribute numOfWheels
```
>
Whenever we create a subclass (i.e. create a new descendent class) we are also including any class attributes of the parent class (aka inheritance). In the example below, object **ford** is of type **Truck** which does not have a class attribute **numOfWheels** declared. Yet when we run this snippet we still get a print out of 4. This is because **Truck** is a subclass of **Vehicle** and all class attributes of **Vehicle** also belong to **Truck**.
>
```python
class Vehicle:
    numOfWheels = 4
    def __init__(self):
        pass

class Truck(Vehicle):
    def __init__(self):
        pass

ford = Truck()
print(ford.numOfWheels)
```
>

# Main Characteristics of Object Oriented languages, explained
The three main characteristics of Object Oriented programming are explained in greater detail below.

## Encapsulation
**Encapsulation** means object behavior and object data are combined in a single entity. This means the object's interface defines the interaction with the object; no need to know or understand the implementation. By defining a specific interface you can keep other modules from doing anything incorrect to your data. Limiting the functions you are going to support leaves yourself free to change the internal data without messing up your users. This is why it is important to write to the interface and not to the implementation. Doing so makes code more modular, since you can change large parts of your classes without affecting other parts of the program, so long as they only use your public functions.
>
Below is an example of an encapsulated class.
>
```python
class Atom:
    def __init__(self, atno, x, y, z):
        self.atno = atno
        self.__position = (x, y, z) #__position is private
    def getPosition(self):
        return self.__position
    def setPosition(self, x, y, z):
        self.__position = (x, y, z)
    def translate(self, x, y, z):
        x0, y0, z0 = self.__position
        self.__position = (x0 + x, y0 + y, z0 + z)

atom = Atom(14, 1, 1, 2)
atom.translate(2, 3, 8)
```
>

## Inheritance
**Inheritance** means it isn't necessary to build every class from scratch; attributes and methods can be derived from other classes that share a common superclass. In the example below, we have two classes: Molecule and Better_Molecule wherein Molecule is the parent class of Better_Molecule. This means that we can reuse a lot of the code and functionality present in Molecule inside of Better_Molecule without having to rewrite a lot of the same code over and over. The class Better_Molecule only has one method **addBasis()** written out, but in reality any object of class Better_Molecule has access to the attributes and methods of Molecule as well. The ability to reuse code is what makes inheritance and object oriented programming so widely used.
>
```python
class Molecule:
    def __init__(self, name = 'Generic'):
        self.name = name
        self.atomlist = []
    def addAtom(self, atom):
        self.atomlist.append(atom)
    def __repr__(self):
        str = 'This is a molecule named %s\n' %self.name
        str = str + 'It has %d atoms\n' %len(self.atomlist)
        for atom in self.atomlist:
            str = str + 'atom' + '\n'
        return str

class Better_Molecule(Molecule):
    def __init__(self, name = 'Generic', basis = '6-31G**'):
        self.basis = basis
        Molecule.__init__(self, name) # Calls the constructor for the parent function
    def addBasis(self):
        self.basis = []
        for atom in self.atomlist:
            self.basis.append(atom)

newMolecule = Better_Molecule('dihydrogen monoxide', '5-18Q**')
newMolecule.addAtom('H') # Object uses method defined in Molecule instead of Better_Molecule
newMolecule.addBasis() # Object can also use methods of Better_Molecule
```
>


## Polymorphism
**Polymorphism** is a programming language feature that allows values of different data types to be handled using a uniform interface. Objects that belong to subclasses of the same superclass can be treated as if they are all objects of the superclass. What this means is if you have a class that is a descendant of another class, say a class **Rectangle** that descends from class **Shape**, you have all the functionality of **Shape** *inside* of **Rectangle**. The superclass **Shape** defines the expected behavior of all descendant classes. In **Circle** we also see how we can have multiple versions of constrcutors (**\_\_init__()**). Examples of this is highlighted below:
>
```python
class Shape():
    def __init__(self, color):
        self.color = color
    
    def getArea(): # We cannot calculate area if we do not know the shape
        pass

class Rectangle(Shape):
    
    def __init__(self, color):
        self.color = color
        Shape.__init__(self, color) 

    def setLength(self, length)
        self.l = length

    def setWidth(self, width)
        self.w = width
    
    def getArea():
        return l * w

class Circle(Shape):
    
    def __init__(self, color):
        self.color = color
        Shape.__init__(self, color) 
        
    def __init__(self, color, radius):
        self.color = color
        self.r = radius
        Shape.__init__(self, color) 

    def setRadius(self, radius)
        self.r = length
    
    def getArea():
        return math.pi * self.r * self.r
        

shape1 = new Shape("blue")

shape2 = new Rectangle("red")
shape2.setLength(3)
shape2.setWidth(4)
print(shape.getArea()) #Prints 12

shape3 = new Circle("orange")
shape3.setRadius(5)
print(shape.getArea()) #Prints 78.5398163397

shape4 = new Circle("orange", 2) # Calls second constructor of circle
print(shape.getArea()) #Prints 12.5663706144

```
>
In our example above, **Rectangle** is an instance of **Shape**, but **Shape** is not an instance of **Rectangle**. The super class (**Shape**) sets the methods, while **Rectangle** defines how the methods operate. We have another child class called **Circle** that then uses the same **getArea()** method, but implements the method in a completely different manner since you cannot just multiply length and width to get the area of a circle.


## Lecture Video - Object Oriented Programming (OOP)
[OOP](https://youtu.be/--be6zblxxo)
