# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Detail several of the general purpose container data types
# Containers
Container types are the main workers of Python programming. These data types get their name because they *contain* several values. Whereas data types such as floats contain a single floating decimal number, a container can have many floats or even other data types. 
>
Below we will detail some of the more common container data types and why you would use them.
# Lists
We've seen **lists** several times before in this course; they're those variables that contain several other values sandwiched between square brackets. If you've done programming with any other type of language before, **lists** are very much Python's array data type. We can create a blank list simply by assigning a variable equal to a set of blank square brackets; don't worry about telling Python how big our list will be, it doesn't care. As we add elements to our list our list will gracefully handle the expansion without us having to do anything. 
>
One of the great things about lists in Python as compared to arrays in say Java is that we can put values of different data types in the same list. We can have a single list containing integers, floats, strings, file objects, anything you want to throw at it and lists will handle it. To add elements to our list, we simply use the **append()** method of the list object and provide a new variable or value.
>
```python
myList = [] # Creation of a blank list

myList.append(5)
myList.append(6)
myList.append(5478919) # Adding of integers
myList.append(.057) # Adding float
myList.append("HELLO") # Adding string

print(myList) # Prints [5, 6, 5478919, 0.057, 'HELLO']
print(myList[3]) # Prints .057
```
>
We can get an element inside a list by simply writing the name of the list variable then putting square brackets immediately to the variable's right side. Inside of the square brackets we put in the spot in the list of the element we wish to grab. Keep in mind that Python uses zero as the first position in any list. In the example above if we wish to grab the 3rd element (i.e. 5478919), we would have to write:
>
```python
myList[2] # Equal to 5478919

# myList[0] is equal to 5
# myList[1] is equal to 6
```
>
An important note about lists is that they can contain duplicate values *AND* lists maintain order; **lists** are ordered sets of elements. This means that the order you put things in is the order you get things in say a for loop or any other type of iteration.
>
The last bit of lists we'll cover are some of the more useful methods available to lists. If you want to count the number of times a certain value is contained within a list we can use the method **count()** to do so. You can also check to see if a certain value is within a list by using the syntax **'value' in myList**; this will return a boolean value indicating if the value is found in **myList**. Lastly, we can use the method **index()** to return the index of the first instance of a value.
>
```python
myList = []
myList.append('a')
myList.append('b')
myList.append('c')
myList.append('d')
myList.append('a')
myList.append('1')
myList.append('2')
myList.append('3')
myList.append('4')

numOfa = myList.count('a') # Returns a value of 2
isEinList = 'e' in myList # Returns False as e is not in the list
isBinList = 'b' in myList # Returns True as b is in the list
indexOfA = myList.index('a') # Returns 0 as 0 is the first index with a
indexOfOne = myList.index('1') # Returns 5 as 1 is in index 5
```
>
# Tuples
**Tuples** are those variables that look like they are lists, but use parenthesis instead of square brackets. Unlike lists, **tuples** are *immutable* and once they've been set you cannot add or remove values. Tuples are rather simple in that you can pretty much only do two things: count the number of times a certain value appears in the tuple and return the index of a certain value in the tuple. There are no **append()**-esque methods for tuples.
>
```python
myTuple = ('a', 'b', 'c', 'a') 
tuples = myTuple.count('a') # Returns a value of 2
indexOfB = myTuple.index('b') # Returns a value of 1
```
>
You may be wondering why anyone would ever use tuples if they're much more limited than lists. Well for starters, tuples are actually faster to traverse and use when compared to lists. And remember how tuples are set in stone and cannot change? Sometimes that is useful knowing that the value cannot change, it makes code a little more stable.
# Dictionaries
**Dictionaries** are a data type used to store information in a key-value manner. Think of **dictionaries** as an address book where names act as a key to retrieve an address (the value). **Dictionaries** use curly brackets instead of square brackets when defining the dictionary, yet use square brackets whenever you want to retrieve a value. Unlike tuples and lists, dictionaries do not have any notion of what order is and cannot contain duplicate keys. Dictionaries, like lists, do not care what data type values are; we can even use a list as the value of a key!
>
```python
languages = {
    'Canada' : 'French',
    'United States' : 'English',
    'Mexico' : 'Spanish',
    'Brazil' : 'Portuguese'
}
languages['Haiti'] = 'French'
suriname = 'Suriname'
languages[suriname] = 'Dutch'
# Can also be written
# languages = { 'Canada': 'French', 'United States' : 'English', 'Mexico' : 'Spanish', 'Brazil' : 'Portuguese' }

print(languages[1]) # This causes Python to throw a 'KeyError' exception
print(languages['Brazil']) # This prints Portuguese
print(languages['Suriname']) # This prints Dutch
```
>
To retrieve a value from a dictionary you simply use square brackets and put in the key for the value you want. In the example above notice how the use of brackets changes between defining the dictionary and retrieving a value. Dictionaries allow us to append values by using square brackets to provide the key then use a normal assignment statement to set the value like how Haiti was handled in the example above.
# Sets
**Sets** are like lists, but can *NOT* contain duplicate values; sets also use curly brackets instead of square brackets. **Sets** are funny in that when we create an empty set we need to use **set()** instead of using two curly brackets like one may think. Yet we can create an non-empty set using curly brackets.
>
Like lists, we can add to sets using **add()** to add a new value to the set. If we try to add a duplicate value to our set, nothing will happen. Python won't even tell warn you, it just doesn't get added to the set. If we want to add many values to our set, we use the **update()** method in order to add them. If any values are duplicates, it ignores them as well.
>
```python
# mySet = {} Cannot create empty set like this
# mySet = {'a', 'b'} But you can create non-empty set like this
mySet = set()
mySet.add(1)
mySet.add(2)
print(mySet) # Prints {1, 2}
mySet.add(1)
print(mySet) # Still prints {1, 2}
otherSet = {5, 6, 7}
mySet.update(otherSet) # Adds {5, 6, 7} to the contents of mySet
print(mySet) # Prints {1, 2, 5, 6, 7}
```
>
When removing values in a set we have three options: **discard()**, **remove()**, and **pop()**. The **discard()**  method will remove a value from the set. If you provide a value that isn't found in the set don't worry as Python will handle that gracefully. **Remove()** does the same thing, you provide a value and it will remove it from the set. But whereas **discard()** handles if the value wasn't found with grace, the **remove()** method will raise a **KeyError** exception. The last method **pop()** removes a value at random. The **pop()** method of a list data type will remove the beginning of the list, but sets do not have an order. This causes **pop()** to randomly return and remove a value from the set.
>
```python
mySet = {'a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e', 'f', 'g'}
mySet.discard('a')
mySet.remove('b')
mySet.pop()
```
>
Some of the more useful set methods allow you to determine which values between sets intersect and which values are unique to a certain set. We can use the **union()** method to create a new set composed of the values of two sets. The **intersection()** method is used to create a new set from those values between the sets that match. Lastly, the **difference()** method is used to create a new set from those values that are unique to provided set.
>
```python
mySet = {'a', 'b', 'c', 'd', 'e', 'f', 'g'}
otherSet = {'z', 'y', 'x', 'w', 'v', 'u', 'b', 'a'}

union = mySet.union(otherSet)
intersection = mySet.intersection(otherSet)
difference = mySet.difference(otherSet)

print(union) # Prints {'c', 'v', 'd', 'w', 'z', 'u', 'y', 'x', 'a', 'b', 'f', 'g', 'e'}
print(intersection) # Prints {'a', 'b'}
print(difference) # Prints {'c', 'd', 'f', 'g', 'e'}
```


## Videos
[Module4-Topic2](https://youtu.be/rnlN23qq424)
