# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Detail what Python modules are
- List a few different useful Python modules
- Learn the difference between modules and packages
- Learn how to make your own module
# Modules and packages
There will come a time in your programming career in which you'll need some sort of functionality that either you do not have the knowledge to write yourself or it would be too time consuming to do so. That is where third party / community packages come in to play. People around the world who use Python have taken upon themselves to release their scripts and algorithms so that others may benefit from them. Chances are that if you need it, it exists already in some form.
>
There are several words one may encounter such as **module**, **package**, **library**, or even **plugin** when trying to find additional Python functionality. Though these may be used interchangeably by those who do not know any better, they are actually quite different. Below I will try my best to set things straight with what each word actually means to Python programmer.
>
# Module
**Modules** are files that contain plain Python code, definitions, and statements. These files always have a file extension of **.py**. Pretty much every Python file you've seen and created thus far can be thought of as a module. Not a terribly useful module, but still a module. It is when we combine several modules and scripts together that modules take form as something useful. 
>
The reason we use would want to use modules is to organize our code logically. We can put all functions that operate on point feature layers in one module, all functions that calculate statistics in another, and so on. As you write more and more code you will start to notice the benefits of organizing your code in such a manner. In addition to being beneficial to yourself, anyone else who may use your code in the future such as a colleague or coworker can find the necessary code.
>
# Package
**Packages** are best thought of as a collection of different modules. "All packages are modules, but not all modules are packages. Or put another way, packages are just a special kind of module". Specifically, any module that contains a **\_\_path__** attribute is considered a package. Packages usually unite several modules under a shared name. An example of this would be the popular Python packages **numpy** or **scipy**. The package **numpy** contains several modules that help perform various numerical operations that plain Python just could not handle.
>
# Library
**Library** is a term usually not used in conjunction with Python but sometimes you'll see it used in place of **package**. These people probably come from a different background like Java or C++ where they use the term **library**. Some could argue that a library can be a collection of packages, but that is still up for debate. The important idea to understand here is that you may see library used to describe a collection of modules instead of package.
>
# import
You may have noticed in a lecture or two the use of an **import** statement at the top of the script. We use the **import** statement at the top to *import* new functionality, classes, data types, and more into our script from available packages. When using **import** we can also *rename* the imported module by using the **as** keyword followed by the new name. In the example below we are importing the **numpy** functionality, but rename it as **np**. This means that within this script, we can reference any **numpy** functionality with **np** instead of **numpy**.
>
```python
import numpy as np
np.arange(15).reshape(3, 5)
```
>
## from blank import blank
You will undoubtedly stumble upon this line at least once in your time programming in Python. This line is a way of loading very specific modules from a package or even specific functions from a module. Why would we want to use this over the plain **import**? Well if you are loading in *SEVERAL* different very large packages, such as arcpy, and only really need a select few modules, why bother loading in everything? That is why we select which modules we want to import using this statement.
>
```python
from numpy import * # Using * will import ALL modules and functions of a package
from numpy import ndarray # Only imports ndarray from numpy
```
>

<!-- ## Standard modules -->
# Creating a module
Say you've created some Python script previously that you would like to implement into a new project. Let us assume that you do not want to copy and paste the code into your new project. What are you to do? We import it! The example below outlines how to go about importing your own module.
>
```python
# addition.py
def addNums(numbers):
    return sum(numbers)
```
>
>
```python
# test.py
from addition import addNums
x = [1, 3, 5, 7, 9]
print(addNums(x))
```
>
We have two python *modules*, one called **addition** and one called **test**. We want to import the functionality of **addition** into **test** without copying and pasting code. We use the **from addition import addNums** line to import in the function **addNums** into our **test** module. With our **addNums** function imported, we are free to use the function without defining it again inside our **test.py**.
>
# Additional resources
- https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html


## Videos
[Module6-Topic1](https://youtu.be/eFiHntky5xc)
