# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Describe a few of the more advanced Python functions
# Advanced Python functions
In this lecture we will be detailing some of the more advanced functions you may run across in Python. It is not a big deal if you never use these functions, but you should be able to at least understand what they are trying to accomplish if you ever come across one.
>
# Lambdas
**Lambdas** are a type of short-hand function that we can write in a single line and assign it to a variable. If you have ever heard of anonymous functions before then you know what lambdas are. These types of functions are useful for when you want a short and sweet function without going through the trouble of setting up a new function definition.
>
```python
# Lambda example
isOdd = lambda num: num % 2
print(isOdd(6))
# Prints 0; which means num was even
```
>
In the example above we have a variable **isOdd** whose value is a lambda function. This function takes in a single parameter **num** and divides **num** by 2. The resulting number indicates the remainder from the division. If **isOdd** returns a 0 then we have an even number, if it returns a 1 we have an odd number. Compare this lambda version versus a full function definition... You can save a whole line of code!
>
```python
def isOdd(num):
    return num % 2
print(isOdd(6))
```
>
# Map
**Map** is a way to apply a function to all members of a list, tuple, or set quickly and concisely. By using **map**, we can do in one line what it would take several lines to accomplish with a for loop or any other standard iteration technique. The example below uses map to quickly generate a list **y** that contains the square of all values in list **x**. 
>
```python
x = [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
squareEm = lambda num: num ** 2
y = list(map(squareEm, x))
z = map(squareEm, x)
print(y) # Prints [4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64]
print(z) # Prints <map object at 0x000001EF315B2470>
```
>
In this example we have a list of numbers **x** containing a few integers. We then define a lambda function **squareEm** which simply takes a number and returns that number raised to the second power. We then call **map()** and pass in two parameters: the function we want to apply to each number, and the list that contains our integers. We then turn our result into a list that prints out neatly. If we do not turn our result into a list, like **z**, you will see we instead printout the location in memory of **z**.
>
# Filter
**Filter** is a type of map that only returns values that are True. Below we are using a **filter** on a lambda that returns True if a value in an input list **x** is even. When the filter is complete, we have a list **y** that contains all values in **x** that are even. Why is this? Our lambda is more or less a conditional: if **num** divided by 2 has a remainder equal to 0, then the conditional is satisfied as an even number would not have a remainder. Since the result is True, it is added to the result. If you look at **z**, you will notice that we've changed the lambda by removing the `== 0` portion. This is not conditional-esque like the filter for **y**, but since any number divided by 2 will have a remainder of either 0 or 1, it can be cast as a boolean value. Remember that boolean values are either False (0) or True (1). Odd numbers will return a value of 1 for the remainder. The 1 will be interpreted as True and returned to the filter.
>
```python
x = [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
y = list(filter(lambda num: num % 2 == 0, x))
z = list(filter(lambda num: num % 2, x))
print(y) # Prints [2, 4, 6, 8]
print(z) # Prints [3, 5, 7]
```
>
# Reduce
**Reduce** is a kind of function used to quickly calculate a single number given a list of values. Provided a function that does the calculation and an input list, **reduce** will run each value of the input list into the function and return to you a result.
>
```python
x = [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]
add = lambda total, num: total + num
summation = reduce(add, x)
print(summation) # Prints 35
```
>
Our example above defines a list **x** that contains a few integers. We then have a lambda function **add** which takes two arguments: the first being the result that is calculated and the second being the input number. This lambda simply adds the current input number to **total**. The variable **summation** contains the call to **reduce** which also takes two parameters: the function used to calculate everything and the input list. 
>
**Reduce** will call the function once for each item in the input list. The number gets processed in the lambda, in this case gets added to **total**. Once all the numbers in the list have been sent to the lambda function, reduce will return the resulting value (**total**) to the variable **summation**.
# Generators
**Generators** are actually not called like the functions above; instead **generators** are special functions that *generate* values for us whenever we call it. These functions can be identified through their use of the keyword **yield** instead of **return**. These can be useful for generating extremely large data sets without allocating memory for all values. Another use case for **generators** is creating any function so that it may be used in a for loop. The example below shows a function **fib()** that takes a single value that determines how many digits in the Fibonacci sequence to print out. This function **yield**s the local variable **a** with every iteration, thereby printing out the sequence.
>
```python
# Example from http://book.pythontips.com/en/latest/generators.html
def fib(n):
    a = b = 1
    for i in range(n):
        yield a
        a, b = b, a + b

for x in fib(6):
    print(x) # Prints 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8
```
>

# Additional resources
- http://book.pythontips.com/en/latest/lambdas.html
- http://book.pythontips.com/en/latest/map_filter.html
- http://book.pythontips.com/en/latest/generators.html


## Videos
[Module6-Topic2](https://youtu.be/71eJzpmoMzQ)
