# TAMU GIS Programming
# Learning Objectives
- Import NumPy
- Perform data conversion between NumPy & ArcGIS
- Perform data analysis with NumPy
# What is NumPy?
Numerical Python (NumPy) is a fundamental package for scientific computing in Python, including support for a powerful N-dimensional array object. NumPy provides an avenue to perform complex mathematical operations and has been part of the ArcGIS software installation since 9.2.
>
A Python NumPy array is designed to deal with large arrays. There are many existing Python functions that have been created to process NumPy arrays, the most noted being contained in the SciPy scientific computing package for Python.
>
# Working with tables and feature data
Table and feature classes can be converted to and from NumPy arrays using functions in the data access (arcpy.da) module.
>
To convert NumPy arrays to tables and feature classes, the arrays must be structured arrays. Structured arrays include fields (or structs) that are used to map the data to field in ArcGIS table and feature classes. 
>
## Structured arrays
A NumPy **structured array** is an n-dimensional array "whose datatype is a composition of simpler datatypes organized as a sequence of named fields". Below is a simple example of a structured array.
>
```python
 x = np.array([('Rex', 9, 81.0), ('Fido', 3, 27.0)], 
    dtype=[('name', 'U10'), ('age', 'i4'), ('weight', 'f4')])
```
>
We call the NumPy method **array()** and provide in a two parameters, each one a list. The first list contains data entries. These entries are contained within a standard Python tuple. The next parameter is a list called **dtype** which we use to define the "structure" of our data. Just like the data list, this list is composed of tuples, this time each tuple describes a portion of data. There are three tuples in dtype which correspond to the three data parts of each tuple in the first parameter. These structure tuples have two parts, the field name and the field data type. The first structure tuple has two values: **name** and **U10**. **Name** is the name of the field; Rex and Fido are names. The value **U10** means that the data type for the name field will be a string of up to 10 characters in length. The next field to be described in dtypes is the **age** field. This is a signed integer 32-bit integer. The last field is **weight** which contains a 32-bit floating-point number. The number next to numerical datatypes indicate how many bytes makeup the number (i4 is 4-bytes, there are 8 bits to the byte, so 4 * 8 = 32 bits).
>
Character | Datatype
--- | ---
'?' | boolean
'b' | (signed) byte
'B' | unsigned byte
'i' | (signed) integer
'u' | unsigned integer
'f' | floating-point
'c' | complex-floating point
'm' | timedelta
'M' | datetime
'O' | (Python) objects
'U' | Unicode string
'V' | raw data
>
## NumPy array to geodatabase feature class
We can convert a NumPy array into a feature class using the **NumPyArrayToFeatureClass()** method of arcpy. Here we provide a structured array, the output feature class name, the field the coordinates are located in, and lastly the output's spatial reference.
>
```python
import arcpy
import numpy

out_fc = 'C:/tmp/ArcGISPython/DC.gdb/pointlocations'

# Create a numpy array with an id field, and a field with a tuple 
#  of x,y coordinates
arr = numpy.array([(1, (471316.3835861763, 5000448.782036674)),
                   (2, (470402.49348005146, 5000049.216449278))],
                  numpy.dtype([('idfield', numpy.int32),('XY', '<f8', 2)]))

# Define a spatial reference for the output feature class
spatial_ref = arcpy.Describe('C:/tmp/ArcGISPython/DC.gdb/removed_trees').spatialReference

# Export the numpy array to a feature class using the XY field to
#  represent the output point feature
arcpy.da.NumPyArrayToFeatureClass(arr, out_fc, ['XY'], spatial_ref)
```
>
## Feature class to NumPy array
In addition to turning a NumPy array into a feature class, we can turn a feature class into a structured NumPy array.
>
```python
fc = 'C:/tmp/ArcGISPython/DC.gdb/pointlocations'
fields = ["idfield"]
arr = arcpy.da.FeatureClassToNumPyArray(fc, fields, skip_nulls=True)
```
>
# Attribution
Text and definitions from ESRI and SciPy.org.
>
# Additional resources
- http://pro.arcgis.com/en/pro-app/arcpy/get-started/working-with-numpy-in-arcgis.htm
- https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/user/basics.rec.html
- https://docs.scipy.org/doc/numpy/reference/arrays.dtypes.html#arrays-dtypes-constructing