# TAMU GIS Programming: Homework 02
>
>**Topic:** Fun with loops
>**100 pt**


# **Outcomes:**
1. Detail Python variables and functions.
2. Learn what is **List** and how to perform some simple calculations on list items.


# **Task:**
> - Answer all parts using whichever loop you see fit
> - Upload your code to Github

# **To Hand In in Canvas:**
1. Screenshot of your answers
2. Link to your Github page that contains the Python code

# Arithmetic in Python
Below you will see a few Python list variables with several numbers in each. It is your job to write some Python code needed to complete each part. Once you have written the Python code necessary to complete each part, be sure to commit and push your work to your TAMU Github account.
## Part 1 (30 pt)
Take the following list and multiply all list items together.
>
```python
part1 = [1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096]
```
>

## Part 2 (30 pt)
Take the following list and add all list items together.
>
```python
part2 = [-1, 23, 483, 8573, -13847, -381569, 1652337, 718522177]
```
>

## Part 3 (40 pt)
Take the following list and only add together those list items which are even. You can use the following snippet of code to see if a number is even or odd. The **%** operation is called **Modulo** and is used to find the remainder after division of one number by another. We divide by 2 and look at the remainder; if there is *no* remainder the number is even, if there *is* a remainder the number is odd.
>
```python
part3 = [146, 875, 911, 83, 81, 439, 44, 5, 46, 76, 61, 68, 1, 14, 38, 26, 21] 

isEven = num1 % 2 == 0
```
>


# Additional resources
Here you may find some useful links to help you with this assignment:
>
- https://developers.google.com/edu/python/lists
