# TAMU GIS Programming: GitHub ePortfolio 
>
>**Topic:** ePortfolio - 600 points

**ePortfolio**
> An electronic portfolio (also known as an eportfolio, e-portfolio, digital portfolio, or online portfolio is a collection of electronic evidence assembled and managed by a user, usually on the Web. Such electronic evidence may include input text, electronic files, images, multimedia, blog entries, and hyperlinks. E-portfolios are both demonstrations of the user's abilities and platforms for self-expression. If they are online, users can maintain them dynamically over time.

Our goal is to make a GitHub ePortfolio of our course in a Software Engineering Wireframe or Workflow Diagram.  Software development is best visualized using Wireframe or Workflow Diagrams similar to Model Builder or FME. 


# The Industry Problem

You are asked to build a software tool that builds a Master Well Database from numerous different databases.  Often companies have several databases of where they think their Wells are located.  These could be from CAD, ArcGIS, Decision Space Geographics, [Petrel](https://www.software.slb.com/products/petrel), [OpenWells](https://www.landmark.solutions/OpenWells), [COMPASS](https://www.landmark.solutions/COMPASS-Directional-Well-Path-Planning), Drilling Info, HSI, State Regulatory, etc.  All these might not agree on the Well location.  

# To make a Master Well dataset you are going propose a GIS Software tool that:
1. Imports all data opinions of well location
2. Inverses between all the data and write to Master Well Location trending position
3. Build a check that determines if the coordinate was NAD83 vs. NAD 27
4. Build a tool that allows users to select the Master Well Location from different aerial images.
<!-- 5. Determin -->

>
# **Task:**  Building your own Wireframe
## This is a basic outline of your Wireframe, but please build your own.
1. Build a GitHub File that has the Wireframe of the Industry Problem with references to your work as examples. (Be creative)
2. **Outline**
 - Where will the software development be done.  Lab 1
 - You need to load several sets of data that represents the Well locations. Lab 3
 - Inverse coordinates of the different Well locations to determine if any agree or their accuracy. Lab 2
 - Write to Master Well Geodatabase. Lab 4
 - Build a buffer to determine if the Well(s) were put in NAD83 vs. NAD 27. Lab 5
 - Build a graduated color Wells to indicate confidence of Master Well location. Lab 6
 - Use aerial images to check Master Well DB. Lab 7
3. **Discuss how you plan to:**
 - Justify the Return on Investment (ROI)
 - Interface with Users
 - Gather requirements
 - Softwares, DBs, etc will be used
 - Code with usages of NumPy, SciPy, PySAL, Model Builder and/or ArcPy
 - Approach commenting, testing, status updates, and reporting
 - Deploy, maintain, and archive your software
 
# **To Hand In:**
1. Build a GitHub ePortfolio linking  your course work as examples in a problem solving format (600 pts)
>
2. Extra Credit (100 pts):
You will also be able to score up to 100 bonus points if you create another ePortfolio using Microsoft Sway. The content used in Sway could be the same as in Github but in Sway formatting.
> [Examples of Design](http://wp.auburn.edu/writing/eportfolio-project/eportfolio-examples/) 
>

## Videos
[GitHub ePortfolio](https://youtu.be/PbBEgCwGhY0)
